---
layout: post
title: Reciprocity in Teaching
categories: [teaching]
comments: true
---

My [last post](2019-08-23-pedagogy-of-care.md) was some time ago. In it, I outlined some thoughts that I'd had having read an excellent article by [Prof. Catherine Denial](http://catherinedenial.org) about the Pedagogy of Kindness. My response talked about a Pedagogy of Care, discussing some features which I hoped might interest some others. An aspect that I left more or less uncovered in that post is *reciprocity* - an acknowledgement from both the person receiving care and the person provding care that they are acting with good and caring intentions.

When I paused to think about the Pedagogy of Care, and when I presented on the subject to some colleagues, I was prompted to think about the idea of trust. Much of what I had to say was, I think, inspired by the idea that we do not trust our students - for example, that they have to prove (with a letter from the doctor or similar) that they are ill in order to extend the deadline for an assignment. We do not simply take their word for it. I have not stopped thinking this - I *do* think that we fail to trust our students when we behave in this way. I completely understand students who feel mistrusted in such a system.

Whilst that's problematic, and I wish it was not the case, the real issue for me is that we fail to demonstrate to our students that we care about them and about their education. True *reciprocity* would see students acknowledging that their tutors are motivated to act in ways which support them in their endeavours to learn and to develop as students (and towards their careers post-graduation). Equally, tutors would acknowledge that their students are motivated to learn, achieve and be successful at university. Both are invested in the same common goal and through this reciprocated understanding work together more effectively.

In our current crisis it's trite to say that "we're in this together" - although that doesn't stop it being true. What is really heartening is that I see evidence of true reciprocity emerging - students and tutors benefitting from a shared understanding of what we're trying to achieve. The 'pivot' to online delivery, necessitated by a need for social distancing, provides me with a simple solution to a potentially horrific problem. I can say to a student who is concerned about themselves or their family that they should put these concerns first, look after themselves and follow all necessary advice without worrying that they will miss out on learning. In the last few days I have been clear with students that we're finding our way, learning as we go, trying things for the first time in an effort to support them as best we can. We are no longer saying 'we know best' or 'this is the way that learning happens best'; we are back to finding out together. If it works, great; if it doesn't then we'll try something else.

The simple 'thank you' from a student is evidence that they can see us trying to work through the situation with them and that they understand that we acknowledge the problems that that are facing, believe them, and know that whilst they have other things to worry about they remain engaged and committed to their education.
